[ENH] BEP031: Microscopy (#881)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/04-modality-specific-files/10-microscopy.md

# Microscopy

Support for Microscopy was developed as a
[BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).

Please see [Citing BIDS](../01-introduction.md#citing-bids)
on how to appropriately credit this extension when referring to it in the
context of the academic literature.

<!---
The following link is temporary and points to the bep031 branch of bids-examples,
update to 'https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples' when examples are merged.
-->
Microscopy datasets formatted using this specification are available on the
[BIDS examples repository](https://github.com/neuropoly/bids-examples/tree/bep031)
(`microscopy_SEM001` and `microscopy_SPIM001`) and can be used for practical
guidance when curating a new dataset.

Further Microscopy datasets are available:

-   In PNG format:  [`data_axondeepseg_sem`](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5498378)
-   In OME-TIFF format: (link to the dataset - pending)

## Microscopy recording data
<!---
The following table will be generated automatically with macros after community review.
A "manual" table is provided to facilitate the review process.
-->
Template:
```Text
sub-<label>/
    [ses-<label>/]

>         microscopy/

Author: We haven’t found a good abbreviation for microscopy, so we decided to keep it as is. We are not comfortable with `micro` alone because it has another meaning on its own as a unit prefix.

>         microscopy/

Reviewer: Looking up [abbreviations for microscopy](https://www.google.com/search?q=abbreviations+for+microscopy) I see some journals use "microsc". Only saving 3 characters there, but possibly less ambiguous than `micro` or `micr`.

Despite posting twice on the matter, I really don't have a strong feeling here. Just trying to offer a suggestion.

cc @yarikoptic to drag the discussion over here.

>         microscopy/

Reviewer 2: i'm happy with `micr`

>         microscopy/

Author: Thank you everyone for the feedback, it seems that `micr` would be the best choice, so I'll make the change in the spec and in our examples.

-   [OME-TIFF](https://docs.openmicroscopy.org/ome-model/6.1.2/ome-tiff/specification.html#)
    (`.ome.tif` for standard TIFF files or `.ome.btf` for
    [BigTIFF](https://www.awaresystems.be/imaging/tiff/bigtiff.html) files)

If different from PNG, TIFF or OME-TIFF, the original unprocessed data in the native format MAY be
stored in the [`/sourcedata` directory](../02-common-principles.md#source-vs-raw-vs-derived-data).

Future versions of Microscopy-BIDS may extend this list of supported file formats.
For example with the [OME-NGFF](https://ngff.openmicroscopy.org/latest/) format currently
developed by OME as a successor to OME-TIFF for better remote sharing of large datasets.

### Modality suffixes
Microscopy data currently support the following imaging modalities:
<!---
The following table will be generated automatically with macros after community review.
A "manual" table is provided to facilitate the review process.
-->
| **Name**                                      | `suffix` |
| --------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| Transmission electron microscopy              | TEM      |
| Scanning electron microscopy                  | SEM      |

> | Micro-CT                                      | CT       |

Author: Absolutely! Thank you for pointing that out, I’ll integrate your suggestion.

In this example, the entity stain is used to distinguish images with different
stains in separate files from the same sample.
```Text
sub-01/
    microscopy/
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-01_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-01_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-02_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-02_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-03_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-03_<modality_suffix>.json
```
In this example, the entity stain is used to distinguish images with different
stains in separate files from the same sample.
In the case where a single file contains different staining in each channel, the
`stain-<label>` is omitted.

Stains or antibodies SHOULD be indicated as appropriate in the `"SampleStaining"`,
`"SamplePrimaryAntibodies"` and/or `"SampleSecondaryAntobodies"` keys in the sidecar JSON file,
although the label may be different.

If more than one run of the same sample, acquisition and stain are acquired during the same
session, the [`run-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#run) entity MUST be used:

> `_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3`, and so on.

Reviewer 3: I'm always wondering when indexes should be zero-padded. 
Here it says it's recommended: 
https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#participant-names-and-other-labels
This often raises some questions at the time of developing apps. Maybe here we can zero-pad in the example?

```suggestion
`_run-01`, `_run-02`, `_run-03`, and so on.
```

Author: That is a good question, I was wondering the same while writing this. :)
In this case, I used the same kind of padding as in the MRI and PET examples for uniformity.

Reviewer 3: Sounds very good!

In some cases, the chunks can be "ordered" and correspond to the displacement of the
microscope stage for example.
In others cases, the chunks can be different images of the same sample with no explicit
spatial relation between them.

Examples of different chunks configurations can be seen in Figure 1.
![Figure 1](images/microscopy_chunks.png "Examples of Microscopy chunks")

Figure 1: Examples of chunks configurations. a) ordered 2D chunks without overlap,
b) ordered 2D chunks with overlap, c) unordered 2D chunks with and without overlap,
d) and e) ordered 2D chunks on different 3D planes, f) ordered 3D chunks

In microscopy, many pyramidal file formats store multiple resolutions for the same acquisition.
In the case where a multiple resolutions file format is converted to single resolution file format,
only the higher resolution file is present in the raw data.
Lower resolutions files MUST be placed under the `derivatives` folder and use the
[`res-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#res) entity.
See [Preprocessed, coregistered and/or resampled volumes](../05-derivatives/03-imaging.md#preprocessed-coregistered-andor-resampled-volumes).

> 

Author: Agreed, thank you, I'll integrate it.

| -------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| PixelSize                  | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | A 2- or 3-number array of the physical size of a pixel, either`[PixelSizeX, PixelSizeY]` or `[PixelSizeX, PixelSizeY, PixelSizeZ]`, where X is the width, Y the height and Z the depth. If the file format is OME-TIFF, these values need to be consistent with `PhysicalSizeX`, `PhysicalSizeY` and `PhysicalSizeZ` OME metadata fields, after converting in `PixelSizeUnits` according to `PhysicalSizeXunit`, `PhysicalSizeYunit` and `PhysicalSizeZunit` OME fields. |

> | PixelSizeUnits             | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Unit format of the specified PixelSize. MUST be micrometer (`"um"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 3: Was going to mention just that :)

> | PixelSizeUnits             | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Unit format of the specified PixelSize. MUST be micrometer (`"um"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 4: we should change that. no one is going to put an EM dataset in `um` it will likely be in `nm` hence we should remove the restriction of a single unit here.

> | PixelSizeUnits             | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Unit format of the specified PixelSize. MUST be micrometer (`"um"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Author: Thank you for this question!

We have basically two options here:
1)	Impose a unit for the field `PixelSize`
2)	Create a field `PixelSizeUnits` that enables the use of another unit.

We were planning on imposing `um` to the field `PixelSize` but chose in collaboration with @satra to go with option 2 for 2 reasons:
1)	For human-readability of the JSON. A user could see the unit without having to know what the imposed unit for `PixelSize` is.
2)	It left room for the spec to grow in the future with other units.

However, we were not planning on adding `nm` in this first version.
I don't have a strong opinion about this and would be comfortable with either imposing a unit in `PixelSize` or having a separate field. The latter may be more complicated for tools down the line to deal with though.
In any case, if we keep `PixelSizeUnits`, it should be restricted to a fixed set of possible units.

> | Immersion                  | OPTIONAL              | [string][]               | Lens immersion medium. If the file format is OME-TIFF, the value MUST be consistent with the `"Immersion"` OME metadata field.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 3: Are there reserved keywords here or is it free text?

Author: It is intended as free-text.
However, there is an optional field in OME-TIFF metadata that restricts the possible values. So in case this field is present in both JSON metadata and OME metadata, they must match.
For other file formats (ex: PNG) or if the field in not present in OME metadata, there is no restriction.

| --------------------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | BodyPart                    | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Body part of the organ / body region scanned. From [DICOM Body Part Examined](http://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/output/chtml/part16/chapter_L.html#chapter_L) (for example: `"BRAIN"`)".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Author: Good question!

As far as I know, there is no similar field in the current BEP032 proposal, maybe @SylvainTakerkart  or @JuliaSprenger  can confirm. Please let us know if we need to harmonize, thanks!

BodyPart was chosen to fit with BEP025 as well as PET who are also using the field.

For PET and microscopy, there is a slight difference in the second sentence of the definition because PET is extracted from the DICOM field (I think) and not microscopy. This will have to be dealt with after community review with yaml file but did not seem to be an issue (see previous comment: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/881#issuecomment-923399363)

> | BodyPart                    | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Body part of the organ / body region scanned. From [DICOM Body Part Examined](http://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/output/chtml/part16/chapter_L.html#chapter_L) (for example: `"BRAIN"`)".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 5: I agree with @mariehbourget on this. I would like to add that for microscopy in particular, perhaps both BodyPart and BodyPartDetails should be RECOMMENDED - I can think of several instances where this could be of consequence, not the least of which are biopsy (or autopsy) samples for use in multisubject and/or multimodal analyses.

> | BodyPart                    | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Body part of the organ / body region scanned. From [DICOM Body Part Examined](http://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/output/chtml/part16/chapter_L.html#chapter_L) (for example: `"BRAIN"`)".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Author: Thank you @pjtoussaint for the feedback.
We are in favor of making `BodyPartDetails` RECOMMENDED as well for microscopy.
Integrated in 60ecb3d.

| BodyPartDetailsOntology     | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                             | If applicable, information about the ontology used for specifying BodyPartDetails (for example: `"UBERON (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/uberon)"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Environment                 | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Indicate if the sample is imaged `"invivo"`, `"exvivo"` or `"invitro"`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Author: Great suggestion, I’ll integrate it.

| ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ChunkTransformationMatrix     | OPTIONAL                                                         | [array][] of [arrays][] of [numbers][] | 3x3 or 4x4 matrix describing spatial chunk transformation, for 2D and 3D respectively (for examples: `[[2, 0, 0], [0, 3, 0], [0, 0, 1]]` in 2D for 2x and 3x scaling along the first and second axis respectively or `[[1, 0, 0, 0], [0, 2, 0, 0], [0, 0, 3, 0], [0, 0, 0, 1]]` in 3D for 2x and 3x scaling along the second and third axis respectively). Note that non-spatial dimensions like time and channel are not included in the transformation matrix. |

> | ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis | OPTIONAL, but REQUIRED if `ChunkTransformationMatrix` is present | [arrays][] of [strings][]              | Describe the axis of the ChunkTransformationMatrix (for examples: `['X', 'Y']` or `['Z', 'Y', 'X']`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Author: In that case the XYZ is meant to refer to the data array indices.

Our issue with applying the matrix “to the pixel indices in the original order” is that in the case of OME-TIFF, The DimensionOrder includes dimention T (time) and C (channel) as well, in any order, so T and C could be mixed with X, Y and Z.

In the case of PNG, I’m not sure what the “original” order would refer to. Unless I’m mistaken, even knowing that X is the width and Y is the height, when loading a 2D image as a matrix, the first indices are the rows (Y) and the second one the columns (X), which can be confusing as well.

So we chose to add the `ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis` to reduce the complexity of having to keep track of the original dimension order, as well as implementing non-spatial dimension into the matrix.

I understand your point that this might be too much flexibility and I am not opposed to making changes here but could use some help figuring this out. Tagging @satra  and @LeeKamentsky here if they want to chip in.

Would it be possible to impose an order (similar to [AnatomicalLandmarkCoordinates](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#anatomical-landmarks) in MRI) which is always XYZ?

> | ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis | OPTIONAL, but REQUIRED if `ChunkTransformationMatrix` is present | [arrays][] of [strings][]              | Describe the axis of the ChunkTransformationMatrix (for examples: `['X', 'Y']` or `['Z', 'Y', 'X']`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 6: I was actually implementing this today and it's easy to pick up the indices from ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis and then apply them to ChunkTransformationMatrix to reorder the matrix the way you like it. So I am fine with the added flexibility and I agree with @mariehbourget that it future-proofs us for datasets with dimensions such as channel and time.

        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_<modality_suffix>.json
```
In this example, JSON metadata is different for each chunk of `sub-01_sample-01`.
JSON metadata may be defined per sample or per chunk as appropriate, per the
[inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle).

In some cases, the chunks can be "ordered" and correspond to the displacement of the
microscope stage for example.
In others cases, the chunks can be different images of the same sample with no explicit
spatial relation between them.

Examples of different chunks configurations can be seen in Figure 1.
![Figure 1](images/microscopy_chunks.png "Examples of Microscopy chunks")

Figure 1: Examples of chunks configurations.

-   a) ordered 2D chunks without overlap,
-   b) ordered 2D chunks with overlap,
-   c) unordered 2D chunks with and without overlap,
-   d) and e) ordered 2D chunks on different 3D planes,
-   f) ordered 3D chunks.

> 

Reviewer 3: It would be very nice if this figure example, which is very clarifying, could be translated into an example with corresponding file names and specific fields, to have a demonstration of how this would be done in practical terms

Reviewer 3: This may also relate to the comments in the Chunck transformations section

Author: Thank you for your feedback, I have a few questions about the examples you had in mind.

In each configuration case, the naming of the files is the same as the one exampled above with "n" number of chunks depending on the configuration. So I would not want to add another similar example.

My suggestion to avoid redundancy would be to present the figure first, and then the filenaming example. We could add `chunk-05` and `06` as an example of `Figure 1)b)` or `f)`.

As for the specific fields, an example of `Figure 1b)` of `f)` json metadata fields for 1 chunk could be added to he Chunk Tranformation section?

Let me know your thoughts and if I interpreted your comments correctly.
Thanks!

Reviewer 3: Ok, maybe I have a more general question first, how do people know how the chuncks align? Just by looking at `ChunkTransformationMatrix` and `ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis`?
If this is the case, then maybe add this 2 fields for each of the cases in the example. Just a few chunks per case is fine to give an idea of how this should work.

Reviewer 6: For my use case (slightly overlapping chunks), I've tried to keep the chunks in the order they appear in the Y axis, where they overlap, but I believe the intention is that the chunk numbers can be arbitrarily ordered and that the chunk transform matrix controls the order / positioning.

Author: > Ok, maybe I have a more general question first, how do people know how the chuncks align? Just by looking at `ChunkTransformationMatrix` and `ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis`?

> the intention is that the chunk numbers can be arbitrarily ordered and that the chunk transform matrix controls the order / positioning.

Yes, that is exact. The numbers themselves are arbitrary (just an index) and the positions of the chunks is determined by the matrix.

I'll make a few changes today in this section to clarify those important points, thank you!

Reviewer 3: Thanks a lot! I think having chunks is one of the main differences with respect to other extensions. Let's try to clarify and add some examples to this part, so it's easy to follow. Having chunk metadata organized will help in data reusage and tool development. I would incline towards having these fields required in the presence of chunks (with the option of unordered or equivalent, to include all cases)

Author: Thank you @guiomar and @LeeKamentsky for your suggestions. I re-ordered the chunk-index section and added a paragraph to recommend the use of Chunk Transformations in the case of ordered chunks, with a link to the corresponding JSON metadata section.

Reviewer 6: Nice! That is super-clear to me. Thanks, @mariehbourget.

Reviewer 3: Thnaks @mariehbourget! I think it reads better now :)
Maybe no need to add the 6 chuncks data example. I'd be more interested in knowing how I should concatenate them in case I want to develop some tools to analysze the data. And I can't identify this information clearely in the text?

Author: Thank you!
In the paragraph under the filename example, we linked to the Chunk Tranformation section and recommend using the matrix.
```
The index number can be assigned arbitrarily and, in the case of "ordered" chunks, the chunks' positions relative to one another SHOULD be defined by an affine transformation matrix in the JSON sidecar file of each chunk, as described in Chunk Transformations.
```
If we want to add JSON example, I would do it in the Chunk Transformation section directly, to keep the metadata section together.

| -------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| PixelSize                  | REQUIRED              | [array][] of [numbers][] | A 2- or 3-number array of the physical size of a pixel, either`[PixelSizeX, PixelSizeY]` or `[PixelSizeX, PixelSizeY, PixelSizeZ]`, where X is the width, Y the height and Z the depth. If the file format is OME-TIFF, these values need to be consistent with `PhysicalSizeX`, `PhysicalSizeY` and `PhysicalSizeZ` OME metadata fields, after converting in `PixelSizeUnits` according to `PhysicalSizeXunit`, `PhysicalSizeYunit` and `PhysicalSizeZunit` OME fields. |

> | PixelSizeUnits             | REQUIRED              | [string][]               | Unit format of the specified PixelSize. MUST be millimeter (`"mm"`), micrometer (`"um"`) or nanometer (`"nm"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 3: Sorry I make this comment here, since it relates to all bids specs. Aren't we promoting to use the International System for metrics? I'm seing in many places we have a place for units (not only in this bep), shouldn't this be previously converted and just keep the SI units in BIDS?

Author: My understanding of the Units [appendix](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/05-units.html#unit-table) was that SI units and multiple prefixes were allowed.
As you mentionned, this is what other modalities in BIDS also do, for example `MEGCoordinatesUnits` [here](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/02-magnetoencephalography.html#coordinate-system-json-_coordsystemjson) with a similar definition, and many others.

We chose this list because it can describe the native units of the scan system used. From a human-readability perspective, `mm`, `um` and `nm` are also more suitable than `m` for microscopy.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I see the specs use SHOULD (not must), therefore it's only recommended. As you say units have specific fields in multiple places, so I'm completely fine for having them here too. Thank you!

| SampleExtractionInstitution | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                             | The name of the institution in charge of the extraction of the sample, if different from the institution in charge of the equipment that produced the image.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

#### Chunk transformations

> 

Reviewer 3: If there are data chunks and the chunk information is not required, how should these chunks be interpreted?

Author: These chunks transformations fields are the only place to indicated how the chunks are ordered. 
The idea is to provide a field were the information could be stored if needed, but not mandatory, as it is not always relevant or available, for examples:
1) We have an example or "unordered" chunks in `Figure 1c)`, where there is no explicit spatial relation between the chunks.
2) When converting "old" dataset to BIDS, the spatial relation between "ordered" chunks may not be known.

Reviewer 3: Then maybe there could be an `unordered` option or similar. 
Is this order relevant for the interpretation of the images? I would feel so (but I'm not expert on microscopy). If this is the case, we may want to avoid this info get lost in the process and forget how it was done some years later. Therefore we may want to encourage reporting this metadata.

Author: > Is this order relevant for the interpretation of the images? I would feel so (but I'm not expert on microscopy). If this is the case, we may want to avoid this info get lost in the process and forget how it was done some years later. Therefore we may want to encourage reporting this metadata.

The information is often relevant but not always depending on the case.
But I agree that we should encourage this metadata to be used when relevant! As mentioned in your other comments, I'll clarify in the chunk-index section how to track the position of the chunks and I'll make theses fields RECOMMENDED instead of OPTIONAL.

Reviewer 3: Sounds good. Or even REQUIRED in case of having chunks

Reviewer 6: There's probably a use case where the chunks don't have an associated transform, e.g:
* Chunks are uploaded but their relationship is not yet computed.
* Chunks' relationships to each other are not known or not relevant (for instance, if the microscope has taken unrelated patches of the same tissue)
I'd make it RECOMMENDED.

Author: I made the matrix RECOMMENDED as it covers most cases i.e. unordered (no chunk transform) or ordered (with chunk transforms if available).
I would prefer not to add another field just to indicate if it's ordered or not.
The descriptions of the fields also already include examples so I did not add other examples.
Let me know if the corrected version works for you. Thanks!

Author: I made the matrix RECOMMENDED as it covers most cases i.e. unordered (no chunk transform) or ordered (with chunk transforms if available).
I would prefer not to add another field just to indicate if it's ordered or not.
The descriptions of the fields also already include examples so I did not add other examples.
Please let me know your thoughts.

Reviewer 3: Ok. Sounds good. Yet, I wonder, if we have ordered chunks and this field is missing, could we still proceed with the data analysis? or having this information missing will prevent from future analysis giving problems in the interpretation?
(We could have `None` in case of not having the info, for example, if this helps)

Reviewer 6: There may be cases where you have ordered chunks and no chunk transform - if the data is implicitly tiled in a known order so that one tile starts where the last ended. The data would be analyzable in that case. I would definitely recommend that dataset constructors include the transform even in this case as documentation of the tiling layout.

There's another use case where it's up to the user of the data to calculate the offsets of the chunks relative to each other using an alignment algorithm. For our data, you can't count that the location of a chunk is correct based on the purported stage coordinates - we have had runs where the stage has become slightly tilted or twisted and a computational alignment must be done. Arguably, the resulting transform is part of the analysis, not the raw data?

So at least two cases where the reconstruction is possible without the matrix.

Author: > Ok. Sounds good. Yet, I wonder, if we have ordered chunks and this field is missing, could we still proceed with the data analysis? or having this information missing will prevent from future analysis giving problems in the interpretation?

My understanding is "it depends on the case".
In some cases, the order of the chunks is important for image analysis and should be preserved to reconstruct the image/volume so we recommend the use of the matrix.
I think there are others cases where the chunks are only different fields-of-view of the same sample and, even if they appear "ordered", it may not be necessary to keep track of their exact order.

> (We could have `None` in case of not having the info, for example, if this helps)

I'm not sure I understand what you mean here. Is it that the ChunkTransformationMatrix could be either `the matrix` if available or the value `None` if not?

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this is possible technically, but yes, I was thinking of something like this

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this is possible technically, but yes, I was thinking of something like this

Author: I made a few research.
There are some REQUIRED fields in the spec that accept explicitly a specific value (ex: a number) or `n/a`.
There is an interesting discussion going on about this [here](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/876).

In our case, we recommend `ChunkTransformationMatrix` when the information is available. So if the field is not there, I would interpret that as not applicable/not available.
I'm sure what the benefit of having the field REQUIRED with `n/a` is in that case?

Author: Hi @guiomar, as mentioned above, I would be more in favor of keeping the `ChunkTransformationMatrix` RECOMMENDED only. Please let me know your thoughts. Thank you!

[BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).

Please see [Citing BIDS](../01-introduction.md#citing-bids)
on how to appropriately credit this extension when referring to it in the
context of the academic literature.

<!---
The following link is temporary and points to the bep031 branch of bids-examples,
update to 'https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples' when examples are merged.
-->
Microscopy datasets formatted using this specification are available on the
[BIDS examples repository](https://github.com/neuropoly/bids-examples/tree/bep031)
(`microscopy_SEM001` and `microscopy_SPIM001`) and can be used for practical
guidance when curating a new dataset.

Further Microscopy datasets are available:

-   In PNG format:  [`data_axondeepseg_sem`](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5498378)
-   In OME-TIFF format: [`Broca's Area Light-Sheet Microscopy`](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5517223)

## Microscopy recording data
<!---
The following table will be generated automatically with macros after community review.
A "manual" table is provided to facilitate the review process.
-->
Template:
```Text
sub-<label>/
    [ses-<label>/]
        microscopy/

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 6: For my current dataset, I'm restricting my NGFF instances to single channels, even though the data is inherently multichannel. The naming convention and the structure of the sidecars only let you represent a single channel / stain with a volume. One of your NGFF indices is always zero (the channel index) but it seems necessary to make it fit into the larger BIDS scheme. It's necessary to split the channels among several files.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Author: > A single OME-TIFF could conceivably contain multiple chunks/runs/etc. (A situation which might become more pronounced with NGFF) Is there a provision for linking to them, or would a user need to split the file(s)?
> 
> Edit: Ah. I assume due to "to accommodate datasets stored in 2D image formats and whole-slide imaging formats" that the intent is more to avoid this situation.

@joshmoore The `chunk`, `run` and `stain` entity are optional (between `[]`), which means you can use them if you need them to distinguish between files that otherwise would have the same name.
If all the chunks are in the same file, you may not used them and it is not require to split into separate files.
If the chunks are in separate files, the `chunk` entity should be used.

@LeeKamentsky Similarly, there is a way in the current specification to describe multiple stains (one per channel). It is described in the SampleStaining field [here](https://bids-specification--881.org.readthedocs.build/en/881/04-modality-specific-files/10-microscopy.html#sample). So in that case (multi-channels/multi-stains), what you can do is omit the `stain` entity in the filename and describe the stainings as a list in the metadata. This example is also described in the `satin-<label>` part [here](https://bids-specification--881.org.readthedocs.build/en/881/04-modality-specific-files/10-microscopy.html#filename-entities).

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Author: Hi @LeeKamentsky, I also wanted to mention that NGFF is not officially supported by this BEP so far. As discussed in our meetings, we included it as a future format while still in development.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 6: Thanks @mariehbourget . For our current stain set, the YO and LEC channels are chemical stains and the NeuN stain is an anitbody one. I'm guessing I could do something like:
```
{
  "SampleStaining":[
    "YOYO",
    "NN",
    "LEC"],
  "SamplePrimaryAntibody": [
    "n/a",
    "Rabbit` Polyclonal Antibody to FOX3/NeuN Cat# RPCA-FOX3",
    "n/a"],
  "SampleSecondaryAntibody": [
    "n/a",
    "Rhodamine Red\u2122-X (RRX) AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L), 711-295-152",
    "n/a"]
}
```

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Author: Thanks @LeeKamentsky, this is an interesting case.
I think your suggestion is the best way to do it (if you want to keep a single file).

Maybe we should change the text for the stain-label

from:
```
Stains or antibodies SHOULD be indicated as appropriate in the `"SampleStaining"`,
`"SamplePrimaryAntibodies"` and/or `"SampleSecondaryAntobodies"` keys in the sidecar JSON file,
although the label may be different.
```

to:
```
Stains SHOULD be indicated in the `"SampleStaining"` key in the sidecar JSON file,
although the label may be different. Description of antibodies SHOULD also be indicated in
`"SamplePrimaryAntibodies"` and/or `"SampleSecondaryAntobodies"` as appropriate.
```

Would that be clearer?

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 6: That's clearer. Thanks.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer: > @joshmoore The `chunk`, `run` and `stain` entity are optional (between `[]`), which means you can use them if you need them to distinguish between files that otherwise would have the same name.
> If all the chunks are in the same file, you may not used `chunk` and it is not require to split into separate files.
> If the chunks are in separate files, the `chunk` entity should be used.

Just to be clear, are you proposing that one can either have a multi-(chunk/stain/run) file or split into multiple (chunks/stains/runs)? I would caution that any flexibility in representation is a burden on recipients of the dataset, both researchers and tools.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 4: @effigies - with ngff this will be possible and we definitely want to have that possibility. see ongoing discussion here: https://github.com/ome/ngff/issues/74 (this is not a burden but an enhancement when you are dealing with single blobs that are TBs in size.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 4: as the field evolves, such raw chunks may eventually become like MRI k-space data and the only data that is stored is some stitched and resampled multi-resolution version. in fact that's already happening to some extent since the original data often has oblique acquisitions, which are not being stored, but resampled into these rectangular chunks.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer: The burden I mean is to understand two disparate representations to be identical and process them accordingly. I did not mean to say it shouldn't be done, just that when we permit such flexibility, it's worth the cost. As long as microscopy folks are satisfied, I have no objections.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Author: @effigies, yes, we are proposing either solutions i.e. multi-(chunk/stain/run) or split into multiple files.
As we discussed with contributors in the developement of the BEP, it seems that both situations are common and can depend on the acquisition protocol.

For example with `stains`, sometimes the stains are acquired separately in separate files, but sometimes acquired together in the same file, in the same session. This is why we have both possibilities i.e. having `stain-label` in the filename or a list of stains in the `SampleStaining` metadata field.

Same goes for `chunks`, where multiple chunks can be in the same file or not. Moreover, `chunk-label` also covers 2D PNG cases or cases where an "old" dataset is converted to BIDS with multiple images per samples.

I personally had not thought of the `run` case before. I assume the same argument would stand, but this may be less in line with the current BIDS definition.

>             sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Author: @LeeKamentsky, I integrated the change in the stain-label text to clarify the usage of SampleStaining. Thank you!

            sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_sample-<label>[_acq-<label>][_stain-<label>][_run-<index>][_chunk-<index>]_<suffix>.json
```
Microscopy data MUST be stored in the `microscopy` directory.

### File formats
The Microscopy community uses a variety of formats for storing raw data, and there is no single
standard that all researchers agree on. However, a standardized file structure has been developed
by the [Open Microscopy Environment](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/) for whole-slide imaging with
the [OME-TIFF file specifications](https://docs.openmicroscopy.org/ome-model/6.1.2/ome-tiff/file-structure.html).
The OME-TIFF file allows for multi-page TIFF files to store multiple image planes and supports
multi-resolution pyramidal tiled images. An OME-XML data block is also embedded inside the
file’s header.

> In Microscopy-BIDS, we accept different file formats to accommodate datasets stored in 2D image

Reviewer 7: The usage of `Microscopy-BIDS` is awkward, and inconsistent with this being integrated into the BIDS standard as a whole.   I think you want text more like:

> The BIDS standard accepts microscopy data in different file formats to accommodate ...

formats and whole-slide imaging formats, to accommodate lossless and lossy compression,
and to avoid unnecessary conversions of the original data from a non-tiled to a tiled format,
or vice-versa.

For BIDS, Microscopy raw data MUST be stored in one of the following formats:

-   [Portable Network Graphics](http://www.libpng.org/pub/png/) (`.png`)

-   [Tag Image File Format](https://www.adobe.io/open/standards/TIFF.html) (`.tif`)

-   [OME-TIFF](https://docs.openmicroscopy.org/ome-model/6.1.2/ome-tiff/specification.html#)
    (`.ome.tif` for standard TIFF files or `.ome.btf` for
    [BigTIFF](https://www.awaresystems.be/imaging/tiff/bigtiff.html) files)

If different from PNG, TIFF or OME-TIFF, the original unprocessed data in the native format MAY be
stored in the [`/sourcedata` directory](../02-common-principles.md#source-vs-raw-vs-derived-data).

> Future versions of Microscopy-BIDS may extend this list of supported file formats.

Reviewer 7: Again, `Microscopy-BIDS` is awkward.  Maybe just omit here:

> Future versions may extend this list...

Author: Thank you @nicholst for your review and feedback!
I have integrated both your suggestions.

For example with the [OME-NGFF](https://ngff.openmicroscopy.org/latest/) format currently
developed by OME as a successor to OME-TIFF for better remote sharing of large datasets.

### Modality suffixes
Microscopy data currently support the following imaging modalities:
<!---
The following table will be generated automatically with macros after community review.
A "manual" table is provided to facilitate the review process.
-->
| **Name**                                      | `suffix` |
| --------------------------------------------- | -------- |

> | Transmission electron microscopy              | TEM      |

Reviewer 8: Nice! What is the source of this vocabulary? This might be some low-hanging fruit for coordinating nomenclature.

Author: Thank you!
This list was created by the BEP contributors, we started with a few modalities and then added some and/or changed the names/suffixes based on comments from the community on the most common modalities/abbreviations used.

-->
| **Key name**                  | **Requirement level**                               | **Data type**                          | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | ChunkTransformationMatrix     | RECOMMENDED if `<chunk-index>` is used in filenames | [array][] of [arrays][] of [numbers][] | 3x3 or 4x4 matrix describing spatial chunk transformation, for 2D and 3D respectively (for examples: `[[2, 0, 0], [0, 3, 0], [0, 0, 1]]` in 2D for 2x and 3x scaling along the first and second axis respectively or `[[1, 0, 0, 0], [0, 2, 0, 0], [0, 0, 3, 0], [0, 0, 0, 1]]` in 3D for 2x and 3x scaling along the second and third axis respectively). Note that non-spatial dimensions like time and channel are not included in the transformation matrix. |

Reviewer 3: Thnaks @mariehbourget ! I think this is clearer now :) 
I still miss a more direct example to link between this matrixes and the chunk numbers/cases?
Could you maybe add the `ChunkTransformationMatrix` for the chunks of some of the examples in the figure?

Author: Yes, I think we could add an example here directly after the table.
I was thinking or re-using the Figure 1b (X and Y translations are not the same length so it's the best example). 
I would give examples of chunk-01 (at the origin) and chunk-05 (with a X and Y translation).
That would look like this:

------
![chunk_figure2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/54086142/141365360-28435726-5486-4b87-9b1d-e705129d84fe.png)
Examples of chunk transformation JSON metadata for `chunk-01`and `chunk-05`:

`sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_<modality_suffix>.json` is at the origin:
```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1]],
        "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": ["X", "Y"]
}
```
`sub-01_sample-01_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.json` is translated of `5 um` in `X` and `3 um` in `Y`.
```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 5], [0, 1, 3], [0, 0, 1]],
        "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": ["X", "Y"]
}
```
------
Please let me know if this is what you had in mind, thank you!

Reviewer 3: That's indeed SUPER useful!! Thanks @mariehbourget!!

Reviewer 3: I see that in the current definition of the `ChunkTransformationMatrix` the examples say: 2x and 3x **scaling,** where as in the figure example it says um **traslation**. How do you know if its a scaling or a traslation?

Author: Thank you @guiomar, I'll integrate the figure and example later today :)

> I see that in the current definition of the `ChunkTransformationMatrix` the examples say: 2x and 3x **scaling,** where as in the figure example it says um **traslation**. How do you know if its a scaling or a traslation?

They are affine matrix. In the `ChunkTransformationMatix` example, **2** and **3** are the scaling coefficient, and there is no translation (**0** in the last column):
[[**2**, 0, 0],
[0, **3**, 0],
[0, 0, 1]]

And in the `figure 1b example`, there is not scaling (scaling coefficients are **1**) and translations (**5** and **3**) are in the last column.
[[**1**, 0, **5**],
[0, **1**, **3**],
[0, 0, 1]]

Reviewer 3: Nice! Now I think I fully got it! Thanks for the patience and explanations :)
Adding this examples on translations and scaling with the figure, may help to easily clarify some of these newer concepts, like chunks, that are not present in other neuroimaging modalities

Author: Thank you again for the feedback, I added the example.

| Scanning electron microscopy                  | SEM      |
| Micro-CT                                      | uCT      |
| Bright-field microscopy                       | BF       |
| Dark-field microscopy                         | DF       |
| Phase-contrast microscopy                     | PC       |
| Differential interference contrast microscopy | DIC      |
| Fluorescence microscopy                       | FLUO     |
| Confocal microscopy                           | CONF     |
| Polarized-light microscopy                    | PLI      |
| Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy       | CARS     |
| 2-photon excitation microscopy                | 2PE      |
| Multi-photon excitation microscopy            | MPE      |
| Super-resolution microscopy                   | SR       |
| Nonlinear optical microscopy                  | NLO      |
| Optical coherence tomography                  | OCT      |
| Selective plane illumination microscopy       | SPIM     |

### Filename entities

In the context of Microscopy, a session ([`ses-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#ses))
can refer to all the acquisitions between the start and the end of an imaging experiment

> for ex vivo imaging or a subject lab visit for biopsy procedure and/or in vivo imaging.

Reviewer 9: Right now it might not be obvious (from the `[xx]` square brackets) that session is not required.  I suggest to add "Consistent with other data types in BIDS, the specification of the session is optional."

Author: Thank you, I integrate your suggestion.

For example: Three brain slices (`sample-01` to `sample-03`) extracted from subject `sub-01`,
imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in PNG format
```Text
sub-01/
    microscopy/
        sub-01_sample-01_SEM.png
        sub-01_sample-02_SEM.png
        sub-01_sample-03_SEM.png
        sub-01_SEM.json
```
In this example, the JSON metadata is common for all samples of `sub-01`.
JSON metadata may be defined per subject or per sample as appropriate, as per the
[inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle).

The [`acq-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#acq) entity corresponds to a custom label that
MAY be used to distinguish a different set of parameters used for acquiring the same modality.
For example, two images of the same sample acquired by bright-field microscopy (BF) in PNG format at
different magnification of 40x and 60x.
In such case two files could have the following names: `sub-01_sample-01_acq-40x_BF.png` and
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-60x_BF.png`, however the user is free to choose any other label as long as
they are consistent across subjects and sessions.

> The [`stain-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#stain) entity can be used to distinguish

Reviewer 9: "can be used" -> "MAY be used" to make the description consistent with the previous one for `acq`

Author: Thank you, I also corrected 2 other instances where "can" was used instead oy "MAY" or "MUST".

The [`chunk-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#chunk) entity is used when multiples
regions (2D images or 3D volumes files) of the same physical sample are imaged with different
fields of view, regardless if they overlap or not.

In some cases, the chunks can be "ordered" and, for example, correspond to the displacement of the
microscope stage.
In other cases, the chunks can be different images of the same sample with no explicit
spatial relation between them.

Examples of different chunks configurations can be seen in Figure 1.
![Figure 1](images/microscopy_chunks1.png "Examples of Microscopy chunks")

Figure 1: Examples of chunks configurations.

-   a) ordered 2D chunks without overlap,
-   b) ordered 2D chunks with overlap,
-   c) unordered 2D chunks with and without overlap,
-   d) and e) ordered 2D chunks on different 3D planes,
-   f) ordered 3D chunks.

<!--- The following example will be generated automatically with macros after community review. -->
For example, as illustrated in Figure 1b: Six chunks (`chunk-01` to `chunk-06`) from the same
brain sample (`sample-01`) of subject `sub-01`, are named:
```Text
sub-01/
    microscopy/

>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_<modality_suffix>.json
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_<modality_suffix>.json
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_<modality_suffix>.json
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_<modality_suffix>.json
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.json
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-06_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
>         sub-01_sample-01_chunk-06_<modality_suffix>.json

Reviewer: Given that this is an example and not a template, why not just pick a suffix and extension? And 6 chunks seems like a lot for an example.

```suggestion
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_CONF.ome.tif
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_CONF.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_CONF.ome.tif
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_CONF.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_CONF.ome.tif
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_CONF.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_CONF.ome.tif
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_CONF.json
```

Reviewer 3: +1 Thanks!
Now the more explainatory chunck examples are in the Chunks Transformations section, so this could be shortened

Author: I updated all the examples in dca2763.

| BodyPartDetails             | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | If needed, additional details about body part or location (for example: `"corpus callosum"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

> | BodyPartDetailsOntology     | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                             | If applicable, information about the ontology used for specifying BodyPartDetails (for example: `"UBERON (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/uberon)"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Author: Thank you, I agree, that was the intention.
I made the change, just to be sure: the data type column is still a "string", but we impose an "URI" in the description?
(like for example `CogAtlasID` [here](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#fmri-task-information))

> | BodyPartDetailsOntology     | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                             | If applicable, information about the ontology used for specifying BodyPartDetails (for example: `"UBERON (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/uberon)"`).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: That appears to be how we've done it, so seems safe to do it here. If it gets changed in the future, we can change it throughout.

> | SampleEnvironment           | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Indicate if the sample is imaged `"invivo"`, `"exvivo"` or `"invitro"`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer: Is there a reason to drop the spaces? And is this a controlled vocabulary, or are these examples? Assuming controlled vocabulary:

```suggestion
| SampleEnvironment           | RECOMMENDED           | [string][]                             | Environment in which the sample was imaged. One of: `"in vivo"`, `"ex vivo"` or `"in vitro"`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
```

Author: Good catch, thank you! It comes from an old habit of mine to avoid spaces in labels, filenames, etc 😅
As a string, we can add the space back. They were intended as controlled vocabulary, I'll make sure we had a validation for that as well.

}
```

**`*_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.json`**:
```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 5],
                                      [0, 1, 3],
                                      [0, 0, 1]],
        "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": ["X", "Y"]
}
```

#### Example of sidecar JSON file (`*_<modality_suffix>.json`)
```JSON
{
        "Manufacturer": "Hamamatsu",
        "ManufacturersModelName": "C9600-12",
        "PixelSize": [0.23, 0.23],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "Magnification": 40,
        "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
        "BodyPartDetails": "corpus callosum",
        "SampleEnvironment": "exvivo",
        "SampleFixation": "4% paraformaldehyde, 2% glutaraldehyde",
        "SampleStaining": "LFB",
        "SliceThickness": 5,
        "TissueDeformationScaling": 97
}
```

## Required Samples file (`samples.tsv`)

For Microscopy data, the [Samples file](../03-modality-agnostic-files.md#samples-file) is REQUIRED.

Additional optional columns in `samples.tsv` MAY be used to describe other samples' attributes.

## Recommended participant data (`participants.tsv`)

> For Microscopy data, we RECOMMEND to make use of the columns `species`, `strain` and `strain_rrid`

Reviewer 9: I suggest to write "As for other datatypes in BIDS, the `participants.tsv` file is required and MUST contain the column `participant_id`", and then elaborate on the optional columns.

Author: I agree, thank you, I integrated your suggestion with a slight modification as "participants.tsv" is recommended in BIDS and not required.

# Microscopy

Support for Microscopy was developed as a
[BIDS Extension Proposal](../07-extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).

Please see [Citing BIDS](../01-introduction.md#citing-bids)
on how to appropriately credit this extension when referring to it in the
context of the academic literature.

<!---
The following link is temporary and points to the bep031 branch of bids-examples,
update to 'https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples' when examples are merged.
-->
Microscopy datasets formatted using this specification are available on the
[BIDS examples repository](https://github.com/neuropoly/bids-examples/tree/bep031)
(`microscopy_SEM001` and `microscopy_SPIM001`) and can be used for practical
guidance when curating a new dataset.

Further Microscopy datasets are available:

-   In PNG format:  [`data_axondeepseg_sem`](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5498378)

> -   In OME-TIFF format: [`Broca's Area Light-Sheet Microscopy`](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5517223)

Reviewer 10: I wonder why bother with `'ing here since it not some "code" (name)?

```suggestion
-   In OME-TIFF format: [Broca's Area Light-Sheet Microscopy](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5517223)
```

Author: This was for consistency with other modalities (ex: https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/03-electroencephalography.html). It also seems to be consistent with recent changes to examples in PR #845.

| Dark-field microscopy                         | DF       |
| Phase-contrast microscopy                     | PC       |
| Differential interference contrast microscopy | DIC      |
| Fluorescence microscopy                       | FLUO     |
| Confocal microscopy                           | CONF     |
| Polarized-light microscopy                    | PLI      |
| Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy       | CARS     |
| 2-photon excitation microscopy                | 2PE      |
| Multi-photon excitation microscopy            | MPE      |
| Super-resolution microscopy                   | SR       |
| Nonlinear optical microscopy                  | NLO      |
| Optical coherence tomography                  | OCT      |
| Selective plane illumination microscopy       | SPIM     |

### Filename entities

In the context of Microscopy, a session ([`ses-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#ses))
can refer to all the acquisitions between the start and the end of an imaging experiment
for ex vivo imaging or a subject lab visit for biopsy procedure and/or in vivo imaging.

The [`sample-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#sample) entity is REQUIRED for

> Microscopy data and is used to distinguish between different samples from the same subject.

Reviewer 10: how unfeasible to have a single sample from a subject?  
I just wonder why it is not an OPTIONAL, 
- if it is possible to have a single sample, why should I bother to come up with a label for it? (most likely matching the `subject`)
- like e.g. `run` or even `session` - introduced/used whenever they are the best way to disambiguate between different "data samples"

Author: This is a great question!
It goes back to the discussion about subject vs. sample in https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/779, and other early discussions on the BEP google-doc.

We needed to preserve the meaning of `subject` of BIDS as "a person or animal participating in the study" whereas the `sample` is the sample (slice, tissue, etc) itself under the microscope.
The distinction was necessary to avoid ambiguity and ensure consistency between modalities (ex: a  `subject` in `anat` always refer to the same "physical entity" as a `subject` in `microscopy`).

For the same reasons, samples' attributes such as "sample type" are described in a separate tsv file (samples.tsv) than subjects' attributes (participants.tsv).

The label MUST be unique per subject and is RECOMMENDED to be unique throughout the dataset.

<!--- The following example will be generated automatically with macros after community review. -->
For example:
Three brain slices (`sample-01` to `sample-03`) extracted from subject `sub-01`.
```Text
sub-01/
    microscopy/
        sub-01_sample-01_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-02_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-03_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_<modality_suffix>.json
```

> In this example, the JSON metadata is common for all samples of `sub-01`.

Reviewer 10: this is getting into an ["Inheritance Principle"](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#the-inheritance-principle).  I think this fits it ok if we look at Examples 2 and 3 there, although I think we still have "Inheritance principle" not really formulated "unambiguously" (see https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/102) .

So - as such Inheritance principle applies to above as well, although the sentence below suggests that inheritance principle is only for the specification at higher level directories.  May be adjust wording a bit to make it clear that above is also follows from inheritance principle ?

Author: I'm sorry, I'm not sure to entirely understand your comment, what are "above" and "below" referring to?

We use that formulation twice, so I agree to reword to make it clearer if it's not.
One option would be to say:
"In this example, the JSON metadata is common for all samples of sub-01. JSON metadata may also be defined for each sample as appropriate, for example `sub-01_sample-01_<modality_suffix>.json`."

Author: Hi @yarikoptic!
I read the discussion in #102, and I'm not sure to understand completely the issue.
I made a suggestion above to change the text without referring to the inheritance principle. Please let me know if this wording is less ambiguous. Thank you!

Reviewer 10: I think referring to inheritance principle is a good thing as long as it follows it.

> I'm sorry, I'm not sure to entirely understand your comment, what are "above" and "below" referring to?

By "above" (I think) I meant the "In this example, the JSON metadata is common for all samples of `sub-01`." sentence.  By "below" I just meant the "JSON metadata may be defined per subject or per sample as appropriate..." where you do explicitly point to inheritance principle (IP).  My point was that the "above" sentence might also be following IP, and thus wording could have been adjusted to not make "above" sentence sound like an ad-hoc custom statement. 
Checkout the rewrite of IP, and in particular the 2.3 rule (all 1s in the markdown): https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/946/files#diff-78a960934ce25feed2c29612b842d25131d0360556c2afc4dcaa9b60aceeb2baR550  -- I think it nicely applies here to that .json, thus IP applies even to that "above" case.

Author: Thank you for the explanation, I understand better your initial comment now.
The sentence "In this example, the JSON metadata is common for all samples of sub-01." was meant as an example of IP and is indeed following IP.

I would suggest to switch the order of the 2 sentences to make it clearer, something like this:
```
JSON metadata may be defined per subject or per sample as appropriate, as per the inheritance principle.
In the example above, the JSON metadata is common for all samples of "sub-01" and defined per subject.
```

JSON metadata may be defined per subject or per sample as appropriate, as per the
[inheritance principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle).

The [`acq-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#acq) entity corresponds to a custom label that
MAY be used to distinguish a different set of parameters used for acquiring the same modality.
For example, two images of the same sample acquired with different magnification of 40x and 60x.
In such case two files could have the following names:
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-40x_<modality_suffix>.<ext>` and
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-60x_<modality_suffix>.<ext>`, however the user is free to choose any other
label as long as they are consistent across subjects and sessions.

The [`stain-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#stain) entity can be used to distinguish
image files from the same sample using different stains or antibodies for contrast enhancement.

<!--- The following example will be generated automatically with macros after community review. -->

> For example:
> One brain slice (`sample-01`) extracted from subject `sub-01`, imaged with three stains

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
For example: one brain slice (`sample-01`) extracted from subject `sub-01`, imaged with three stains
```
unless want into a separate paragraph -- then an empty line is needed. But I have chosen above suggestion as matching the examples I found in current BIDS

Author: Thank you for pointing this out, the intention was to have everything in one paragraph as you suggested. I corrected this instance and 2 others in bfb027b.

        sub-01_sample-01_stain-02_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-03_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_stain-03_<modality_suffix>.json
```
In this example, the entity stain is used to distinguish images with different
stains in separate files from the same sample.
In the case where a single file contains different staining in each channel, the
`stain-<label>` is omitted.

Stains or antibodies SHOULD be indicated as appropriate in the `"SampleStaining"`,
`"SamplePrimaryAntibodies"` and/or `"SampleSecondaryAntobodies"` keys in the sidecar JSON file,
although the label may be different.

If more than one run of the same sample, acquisition and stain are acquired during the same
session, the [`run-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#run) entity MUST be used:
`_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3`, and so on.
If only one run was acquired the `run-<index>` can be omitted.

The [`chunk-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#chunk) entity is used when multiples
regions (2D images or 3D volumes files) of the same physical sample are imaged with different
fields of view, regardless if they overlap or not.

> In some cases, the chunks can be "ordered" and correspond to the displacement of the
> microscope stage, for example.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
In some cases, the chunks can be "ordered" and, for example, correspond to the displacement of the
microscope stage.
```

Author: Thank you, I committed your suggestion.

-   d) and e) ordered 2D chunks on different 3D planes,
-   f) ordered 3D chunks.

<!--- The following example will be generated automatically with macros after community review. -->
For example, as illustrated in Figure 1b:
Six chunks (`chunk-01` to `chunk-06`) from the same brain sample (`sample-01`) of subject `sub-01`,
are named:
```Text
sub-01/
    microscopy/
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-01_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-02_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-03_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-04_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.json
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-06_<modality_suffix>.<ext>
        sub-01_sample-01_chunk-06_<modality_suffix>.json
```
The index number can be assigned arbitrarily and, in the case of "ordered" chunks, the chunks'

> positions relative to one another SHOULD be defined by an affine transformation matrix in the JSON

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
positions relative to the previous one SHOULD be defined by an affine transformation matrix in the JSON
```
? since not sure what specific one is "one another"

Author: There is no "previous one" as the chunks' numbers are arbitrary. The position of each chunk is defined in a matrix in [chunk transformations](http://127.0.0.1:8000/04-modality-specific-files/10-microscopy.html#chunk-transformations).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
relative positions (in terms of scaling and traslation) SHOULD be defined by an affine transformation matrix in the JSON
```

Author: I integrated @guionar suggestion for chunks' relative positions, thank you!
@yarikoptic please let us know if it sounds good to you.

| ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis | REQUIRED if `ChunkTransformationMatrix` is present  | [arrays][] of [strings][]              | Describe the axis of the ChunkTransformationMatrix (for examples: `["X", "Y"]` or `["Z", "Y", "X"]`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

An example of chunk transformations JSON metadata for `chunk-01` and `chunk-05` of Figure 2
is shown below:

![Figure 2](images/microscopy_chunks2.png "Example figure for chunks transformations")

Figure 2: Example figure for chunks transformations.

In this example, there is no scaling and `chunk-01` is at the origin.

> `chunk-05` is translated of 5 um in `X` and 3 um in `Y`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`chunk-05` is translated by 5 um along `X+` and by 3 um along `Y+`.
```

Future versions may extend this list of supported file formats, for example with the
Next-Generation File Formats currently developed by OME ([OME-NGFF](https://ngff.openmicroscopy.org/latest/))
as a successor to OME-TIFF for better remote sharing of large datasets.

### Modality suffixes
Microscopy data currently support the following imaging modalities:
<!---
The following table will be generated automatically with macros after community review.
A "manual" table is provided to facilitate the review process.
-->
| **Name**                                      | `suffix` |
| --------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| Transmission electron microscopy              | TEM      |
| Scanning electron microscopy                  | SEM      |
| Micro-CT                                      | uCT      |
| Bright-field microscopy                       | BF       |
| Dark-field microscopy                         | DF       |
| Phase-contrast microscopy                     | PC       |
| Differential interference contrast microscopy | DIC      |
| Fluorescence microscopy                       | FLUO     |
| Confocal microscopy                           | CONF     |

> | Polarized-light microscopy                    | PLI      |

Author: It was brought to our attention that for PLI, you get images from different contrasts from the microscope (i.e. orientation, transmittance image, retardance image and inclination image) for the same acquisition.

I think this case is already covered in our BEP with the `acq-<label>` but I wanted to share my thoughts so everyone can chip in.

The `acq-<label>`, which is described [here](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/09-entities.html#acq) in BIDS as “a custom label the user MAY use to distinguish a different set of parameters used for acquiring the same modality” with the example “In case different sequences are used to record the same modality (for example, RARE and FLASH for T1w) this field can also be used to make that distinction".

It appears to me that the example matches the PLI case, and that the different PLI acquisitions could be named for example:
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-orientation_PLI.ome.tif`
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-transmittance_PLI.ome.tif`
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-retardance_PLI.ome.tif`
`sub-01_sample-01_acq-inclination_PLI.ome.tif`

Reviewer 11: Hi all. Many thanks for all your efforts on this initiative to date! 

My one query with the PLI solution is that the different PLI maps (retardance, transmittance, orientation, inclination) are all acquired with the same acquisition parameters. In the basic PLI setup we typically acquire a series of images where the analyser (rotatable polariser) is at different rotation angles. We then fit a sinusoid on a pixel wise basis (wrt polarisation angle) to extract the various PLI maps. It therefore would make sense to use the aqu flag if you were to share the original images acquired with different polariser rotations, but it might not be super appropriate to use it to distinguish between the output maps?

One could of course argue that the PLI maps aren’t exactly raw data, however I think that they can be considered "minimally processed data" and are often the most useful maps to share.

The answer may be that this distinction isn’t super important when using the acq flag, but I thought it might be helpful to highlight this as potentially being a slightly odd use case.

Author: Thanks @amyfdh for the feedback and clarification!

I agree with you that the `acq-label` in its strict sense would better apply to the original image acquired with different polariser rotations.
In that case, I think the PLI maps would be considered "processed data" and part of a `derivatives` pipeline in BIDS.

```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 0],
                                      [0, 1, 0],
                                      [0, 0, 1]],
        "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": ["X", "Y"]
}
```

**`*_chunk-05_<modality_suffix>.json`**:
```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 5],
                                      [0, 1, 3],
                                      [0, 0, 1]],
        "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": ["X", "Y"]
}
```

#### Example of sidecar JSON file (`*_<modality_suffix>.json`)
```JSON
{
        "Manufacturer": "Hamamatsu",
        "ManufacturersModelName": "C9600-12",
        "PixelSize": [0.23, 0.23],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "Magnification": 40,
        "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
        "BodyPartDetails": "corpus callosum",
        "SampleEnvironment": "exvivo",
        "SampleFixation": "4% paraformaldehyde, 2% glutaraldehyde",
        "SampleStaining": "LFB",
        "SliceThickness": 5,
        "TissueDeformationScaling": 97
}
```

## Required Samples file (`samples.tsv`)

> For Microscopy data, the [Samples file](../03-modality-agnostic-files.md#samples-file) is REQUIRED.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For Microscopy data, the [Samples file](../03-modality-agnostic-files.md#samples-file) `sample.tsv` is REQUIRED and it's associated metadata sidecar `samples.json` file is RECOMMENDED.
```

I'd also include in info about the sidecar json file, is this recommended or required as well?

Author: The samples.json file is recommended.
I updated the section to include your feedback. Thanks!

Additional optional columns in `samples.tsv` MAY be used to describe other samples' attributes.

## Recommended participant data (`participants.tsv`)

> As for other data types in BIDS, the [Participants file](../03-modality-agnostic-files.md#participants-file)
> is RECOMMENDED and MUST contain the column `participant_id`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As for other data types in BIDS, the [Participants file](../03-modality-agnostic-files.md#participants-file)`participants.tsv`and its associated sidecar `participants.json` file
are RECOMMENDED and MUST contain the `participant_id` field.
```

Author: I updated the section to include your feedback. However, I don't think `participant_id` is mandatory in participants.json (from the example [here](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#participants-file)), so I kept it as a "column" of participants.tsv.

In addition, I added an example of particpants.json with the species, strain and strain_rrid definitions.
I would not add more details to these sections to avoid too much duplication with the general Samples file and Participants file sections of the spec.

Reviewer 9: The `participants.tsv` is not recommended, it MUST be present and MUST have the `participant_id` column. The `participants.json` is not required but RECOMMENDED and, if present, may contain one or more fields describing the columns found in the TSV. So it is not required for the json to describe the participant_id field and your example is fine. But it should be more clear that the requirements on the presence and content of the tsv and json differ. We don't want people to get the impression that the tsv is optional as well.

Reviewer 4: @robertoostenveld - the current specs say otherwise: https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#participants-file

Author: Hi @robertoostenveld, as @satra mentioned, the participants.tsv file is recommend in the main BIDS spec:
```
The purpose of this RECOMMENDED file is to describe properties of participants such as age, sex, handedness. If this file exists, it MUST contain the column participant_id, which MUST consist of sub-<label> values identifying one row for each participant, followed by a list of optional columns describing participants.
```
I don't think microscopy should go against the main spec. But we added this section to highlight the difference between samples.tsv and participants.tsv and also recommend the use of species, strain and strain_rrid.

> So it is not required for the json to describe the participant_id field and your example is fine. But it should be more clear that the requirements on the presence and content of the tsv and json differ. 

Similarly, I feel like the requirements on the content of tsv vs. json should be detailed in the main Participants file section and not in microscopy specifically. I would also prefer to avoid duplication as much as possible as it can create confusion for the user.

Reviewer 9: 🤨 that is new too me. I thought (and had always misread the spec, which states "file" whereas it actually refers to two files) that only the json was optional. 

I agree that documentation should where possible be at the highest level. I checked other modality specific sections, none of them mentions the `participants.tsv` files.

Author: Thanks @robertoostenveld for the feedback.

I followed yours and @guiomar suggestion to clarify the sample and participant sections. It ended up with more duplication  with the higher level which may not be advisable. I would be in favor of going back to a simpler wording which only highlighted the specificity of microscopy data.

------------

### Required Samples file
For Microscopy data, the [Samples file](https://bids-specification--881.org.readthedocs.build/en/881/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#samples-file) `samples.tsv` is REQUIRED and its associated sidecar `samples.json` file is RECOMMENDED.

Additional optional columns in `samples.tsv` MAY be used to describe other samples' attributes.

### Recommended participant data
For Microscopy data, we RECOMMEND to make use of the columns `species`, `strain` and `strain_rrid` in the [Participants file](https://bids-specification--881.org.readthedocs.build/en/881/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#participants-file) when applicable.

Additional optional columns in `participants.tsv` MAY be used to describe other subjects' attributes.

For example:
```
participant_id species strain strain_rrid
sub-01 mus musculus C57BL/6J RRID:IMSR_JAX:000664
sub-02 mus musculus C57BL/6J RRID:IMSR_JAX:000664
```
------------

As for reference, [Genetic Info](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/08-genetic-descriptor.html#subject-naming-and-participants-file) and [PET](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/09-positron-emission-tomography.html#recommended-patient-data) also have sections mentioning modality specific field in the participants file.

@robertoostenveld and @guiomar, let me know if this "lighter" wording would be acceptable for you.
Thank you for your help!

Reviewer 9: yes, I am happy with this (and apologies for causing confusion).

Author: Thanks @robertoostenveld for the feedback.

@guiomar, please let me know if that works for you as well, thank you!

Reviewer 3: Thanks @mariehbourget It looks good to me as well :)

The only suggestion that I would made (either here or in the general participants.tsv/json), is to include an example of a **participants.json** so people would have a template to use the definitions of `species`, `strain` and `strain_rrid` (as there are now for `age`,`sex`, `handedness`, etc)

Author: Hi @robertoostenveld and @guiomar. I made the changes to the samples/participants question with the "lighter" wording but kept the json example with `species`, `strain` and `strain_rrid`.
I think it's a good compromise between "including examples" and "avoiding duplication".
Thanks!

as a successor to OME-TIFF for better remote sharing of large datasets.

### Modality suffixes
Microscopy data currently support the following imaging modalities:

{{ MACROS___make_suffix_table(
      [
         "TEM",
         "SEM",
         "uCT",
         "BF",
         "DF",
         "PC",
         "DIC",
         "FLUO",
         "CONF",
         "PLI",
         "CARS",
         "2PE",
         "MPE",
         "SR",
         "NLO",
         "OCT",
         "SPIM",
      ]
   )
}}

### Filename entities

In the context of Microscopy, a session ([`ses-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#ses))
can refer to all the acquisitions between the start and the end of an imaging experiment
for ex vivo imaging or a subject lab visit for biopsy procedure and/or in vivo imaging.
Consistent with other data types in BIDS, the session entity is optional.

The [`sample-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#sample) entity is REQUIRED for
Microscopy data and is used to distinguish between different samples from the same subject.
The label MUST be unique per subject and is RECOMMENDED to be unique throughout the dataset.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"Sample" concept may be similar or equivalent, to other terms, such as “tissue” or “cell”.
```
Same here, maybe is good to mention some similar terms that people may use, so they easily feel recognized?

Author: The link of `sample-<label>` goes to the definition of sample in the [appendix](https://bids-specification--881.org.readthedocs.build/en/881/99-appendices/09-entities.html#sample) which is "A sample pertaining to a subject such as tissue, primary cell or cell-free sample.". I would prefer not to duplicates definition in this case.

         "sub-01_sample-01_stain-03_SPIM.ome.tif": "",
         "sub-01_sample-01_stain-03_SPIM.json": "",
         },
      }
   }
) }}

In this example, the entity stain is used to distinguish images with different
stains in separate files from the same sample.
In the case where a single file contains different staining in each channel, the
`stain-<label>` is omitted.

Stains SHOULD be indicated in the `"SampleStaining"` key in the sidecar JSON file,
although the label may be different.
Description of antibodies SHOULD also be indicated in `"SamplePrimaryAntibodies"`
and/or `"SampleSecondaryAntobodies"` as appropriate.

If more than one run of the same sample, acquisition and stain are acquired during the same
session, the [`run-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#run) entity MUST be used:
`_run-1`, `_run-2`, `_run-3`, and so on.
If only one run was acquired the `run-<index>` can be omitted.

The [`chunk-<index>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#chunk) entity is used when multiples
regions (2D images or 3D volumes files) of the same physical sample are imaged with different
fields of view, regardless if they overlap or not.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The term “chunk” is similar to others, such as, “slice”, “slab” and “patch”, and was chosen as best representing the concept of a image or volume “portion”. 
```

Maybe is good to mention other terms that are similar or equivalent, so people that use them may recognize it?

Author: I understand your point but I'm afraid that adding new terms that are not part of the specification will be more confusing for people who are not used to them.

I would suggest to add the word "portion" to the original sentence and change the word "multiple" for different", ex:
```
The `chunk-<index>` entity is used when different regions/portions (2D image or 3D volume files) of the same physical sample are imaged with different fields of view, regardless if they overlap or not.
```

-   Other transformations should be described in derivatives.

{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "ChunkTransformationMatrix": "RECOMMENDED if `<chunk-index>` is used in filenames",
      "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": "REQUIRED if `ChunkTransformationMatrix` is present",
   }
) }}

An example of chunk transformations JSON metadata for `chunk-01` and `chunk-05` of Figure 2
is shown below:

![Figure 2](images/microscopy_chunks2.png "Example figure for chunks transformations")

Figure 2: Example figure for chunks transformations.

In this example, there is no scaling and `chunk-01` is at the origin.
`chunk-05` is translated by 5 um along `X+` and by 3 um along `Y+`.

**`*_chunk-01_<suffix>.json`**:
```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 0],
                                      [0, 1, 0],
                                      [0, 0, 1]],
        "ChunkTransformationMatrixAxis": ["X", "Y"]
}
```

**`*_chunk-05_<suffix>.json`**:
```JSON
{
        "PixelSize": [1, 1],
        "PixelSizeUnits": "um",
        "ChunkTransformationMatrix": [[1, 0, 5],
                                      [0, 1, 3],

>                                       [0, 0, 1]],

Reviewer 3: I wonder what this last row of the matrix is representing? 
If axis are X and Y (e.g. in this example), I see why there must be 3 columns, one for scaling in X, one for scaling in Y and one for traslation. But I wonder why 3 rows and not just 2? Can you think of an example where the very last row is different from [0, 0, 1]?
Sorry for bugging you so much about the Chuck transformations, I'm new to this concept and I want to ensure I understand it properly. Thanks!

Author: No problem!
If I'm not mistaken, by definition the last row of an affine matrix will always be [0, 0, 1] for 2D and [0, 0, 0, 1] for 3D.
This line allows the translation to be done with matrix multiplication.
A full example can be found here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transformation_matrix#Affine_transformations
